---
title: &title 'Chokuretsu ROM Hacking Challenges Part 2 – Archive Archaeology'
description: &desc 'Jonko puts the Shade bin archive under the microscope and explains how he figured out how to unpack it.'
navigation:
  author: 'Jonko'
  year: 2022
  month: 10
  day: 26
  tags: ['chokuretsu', 'romhacking']
  image: '0003/00_thumbnail.png'
head:
  meta:
  - name: 'og:title'
    value: *title
  - name: 'og:description'
    value: *desc
  - name: 'og:image'
    value: &img https://haroohie.club/images/blog/0003/00_thumbnail.png
  - name: 'og:url'
    value: 'https://haroohie.club/blog/2022-10-26-chokuretsu-archives'
  - name: 'twitter:title'
    value: *title
  - name: 'twitter:descripton'
    value: *desc
  - name: 'twitter:image'
    value: *img
  - name: 'twitter:card'
    value: 'summary_large_image'
---
[Last time](2022-10-19-chokuretsu-compression), we talked about how I reverse-engineered the compression algorithm used in Suzumiya Haruhi no Chokuretsu. Today, we’ll be taking a look at the archives that contain the Chokuretsu files. Please note that while I’ll generally try to keep these blog posts separate, this one absolutely builds on concepts we discussed last time, so I highly recommend you read it first!

Thanks to the proliferation of zip files, you’re likely already familiar with archives: they’re files that contain files, usually compressed versions to help save space on disk. Common archives include `.zip`, `.rar`, `.7z`, and `.tar.gz` files.

## Unpacking the ROM
But let’s back up for a second – we’ve been talking about “files” in the Chokuretsu ROM, and it’s worth pausing for a moment to talk about how the DS ROM is itself a kind of archive. A Nintendo DS ROM is essentially just a filesystem – in fact, the main executable is just a file named `arm9.bin`. With that knowledge, let’s take apart Chokuretsu and see what’s inside.



As you can see, the Chokuretsu filesystem is relatively simple, with five archives (`dat.bin`, `evt.bin`, `grp.bin`, `scn.bin`, and `snd.bin`) and three data folders (`bgm`, `movie`, and `vce`). Additionally, CrystalTile2 (the program we’re using here to view this filesystem) places all the system files (including the main executable) in a directory named `FSI.CT`. Let’s look more closely at those `.bin` files: Chokuretsu uses a proprietary archive format with the extension `.bin`. Since Shade is the developer of Chokuretsu, these files are referred to as “Shade bin archives” or just “bin archives” when context is established. Some of you may have already guessed what some of these archives contain, but briefly:

* `dat.bin` contains **dat**a files – generic files that configure various aspects of the game, such as character dialogue settings and the order in which certain graphics files are loaded into the game. Additionally, it contains strings files for the UI.
* `evt.bin` contains “**ev**en**t**” files – the main string (a “string” is essentially a line of text) files of the game. The vast majority of the files in this archive define each “scene” in the game, including dialogue, choices, topics, etc.
* `grp.bin` contains **gr**a**p**hics files – this includes tiles, textures, layouts, and the game font.
* `scn.bin` – it’s currently unknown what this archive is for. The files in it don’t really seem to be used, or if they are, they’re not used in an obvious way.
* `snd.bin` is not actually a bin archive, despite its name – rather, it’s a DS standard SDAT archive containing the game’s sound effects.

But that’s putting the cart before the horse – while we had guessed what the archives contained (more or less correctly) based on their names and some preliminary investigation before we cracked them open, it was only after reverse-engineering the archive structure that we were able to determine what they really had inside them. So let’s get started by picking an archive to look at.

For convenience, let’s pick the archive that contains the file we were looking at last time. We can open the game up in CrystalTile2 and navigate to where we were looking last time…



And in the lower left corner it tells us that this data is contained in `evt.bin` (which is what we might have guessed, since it’s string data).

## Examining `evt.bin`

Before we open it up in the hex editor, though, let’s talk a bit about what we’d expect to see in an archive (in order to confirm that `evt.bin` is in fact an archivesince we’re assuming this is one and we want to be able to confirm that). Here’s the attributes I’d put down:

* The number of files in the archive
* A list of files in the archive – this would be composed of _filenames_ and _offsets_
* The file data for all the files

A quick explanation on that second bullet – filenames are self explanatory, but an offset is a way of talking about the location of data in a file. Briefly:


* An _address_ is the _absolute_ location of data in memory. When we set memory breakpoints in the debugger, we use addresses.
* An _offset_ is the _relative_ location of data in a file. When we have a single file open in the hex editor, we talk about offsets.
* A _pointer_ is a value that _points_ to an address or offset. A pointer to an address offset might look like an integer with the value 0x0220B4A8, while a pointer to an offset might be as simple as 0x3800. Addresses are used by the program when accessing memory, while offsets are used in files (since they can be loaded into arbitrary locations in memory), so it’s up to the program itself to convert those offsets into addresses.

So with that out of the way, let’s crack open `evt.bin`. First place we’ll start is at the top of the file:



Alright, that’s a lotta numbers! I’ve highlighted some of the patterns we’re going to look at later, but first let’s scroll down a bit just to get a feel for the layout of this file…

 


Interesting! After we scroll past a large chunk of data, we end up in a field of zeros, followed by another large chunk of data and then another field of zeros and so on. What’s more, after we scroll past the first bit, each of the large chunks of data seems to start on a multiple of 0x800 (hard to get that sense from two images, but trust me, crack open the files and you’ll see the pattern). To me, this looks like the_file data_ – and what’s more, each file is neatly spaced with padding in between.

Let’s get back to the top of the file – again, a lot of numbers, but there are patterns here. But before we take a look at the numbers in cyan, a quick explanation on _endianness_. So far, we’ve mostly thought about things in terms of bytes, which can have values between 0 (0x00) and 255 (0xFF). But what about when we need to represent integers larger than that? When we need to do that, we use _multibyte integers_. The common types of these include:

| Number of Bytes | Formal Name | C# Name |
|---|---|---|
| 2 | 16-bit integer | `short`{lang='csharp'} (signed) or `ushort`{lang='csharp'} (unsigned) |
| 4 | 32-bit integer | `int`{lang='csharp'} (signed) or `uint`{lang='csharp'} (unsigned) |
| 8 | 64-bit integer | `long`{lang='csharp'} (signed) or `ulong`{lang='csharp'} (unsigned) |

There are two possible ways to store a 16-bit integer, however. For example, take 512 (0x200). You could choose to store that with the _most-significant byte_ first (i.e. `02 00`) or with the _least-significant byte_ first (i.e. `00 02`). This decision is called _endianness_, where the former is “big-endian” and the latter is “little-endian.” Frequently, the decision is made simply to align with whatever the architecture uses; ARM is a little-endian architecture so these files are likely little-endian as well.

Going back to the cyan highlights in the image above, we can see that if we interpret the highlighted values as little-endian 16-bit integers, we have a sequence like:

```
0x000A, 0x000C, 0x000E, 0x0010, 0x0014, 0x0016, 0x0018, 0x001A, 0x001C, 0x001E, 0x0020, 0x0022 …
```

These integers are increasing as we continue along! In fact, they continue to increase for another 0x900 bytes, with the pattern terminating at the final integer 0x94E:



These definitely aren’t file offsets (we know this because the files are definitely longer than e.g. 2 bytes long), but it’s possible they might _map_ to file offsets somehow since they’re steadily increasing. That would suggest that maybe there is one of these values per file – so just how many are there? The values are two bytes long and spaced two bytes apart for a total of four bytes per iteration. The sequence begins at 0x20 and ends at 0x950. Therefore:

```
(0x950 - 0x20) / 0x04 = 0x24C
```

Oh! Look at that! 0x24C happens to be the very first number to appear in the file (highlighted in pink). So we can guess that the first number is the number of files in the archive. (To double check this, we should check that the pattern is consistent for the other archives as well – which it is.)

## Into the Thick of It, Reprise
The purpose of the previous section was to demonstrate how to a) identify that a file is an archive and b) use some basic pattern matching to begin reverse-engineering the archive. However, this archive is a little weird and obfuscated – while most archives might simply have a table at the top containing the filename and offset (location in the archive) for each file, this one clearly doesn’t have that. That information is somehow hidden. There are a variety of ways one could deal with this, but for me, the easiest option seemed to be diving back into the assembly again.

### File Table Load
First, we should try to find the code where these archives are parsed. To do this, we’re going to do essentially the same process as we did last time – we’re going to do a memory search to find the archive _header_ (the top of the file, before the files in the archive start) in memory, set a read breakpoint at that memory address, and see what code uses the archive header. So, we go back to DeSmuME and search for the four bytes at offset 0x20 (remember, DeSmuME’s memory search expects you to enter the bytes in reverse order, so instead of `D1 00 0A 00` we enter `00 0A 00 D1`)...



And once again, we’ve found a single hit. So, let’s open up the memory viewer and head to 0x020F7720…



And it matches the `evt.bin` header exactly! This means that the `evt.bin` header is loaded into 0x020F7700 (0x20 back from our search result since that was the offset we picked). So now, we’ll load up the game in no$GBA (I was a little hard on no$ last time around, but its debugging tools _are_ very convenient) and set a read breakpoint for 0x020F7700.



Nice, we hit our breakpoint as soon as the game is loaded. This means that the archive headers are loaded on boot. Let’s pull up this subroutine in IDA.



```arm
RAM:02033818                 PUSH    {R3-R9,LR}
RAM:0203381C                 LDR     R2, =dword_20A9AB0
RAM:02033820                 MOV     R6, R0
RAM:02033824                 LDR     R1, [R2]
RAM:02033828                 LDR     R0, =aFiletblLoadSta ; "--- filetbl_load start <%d> ---\n"
RAM:0203382C                 ADD     R1, R1, #0x3F ; '?'
RAM:02033830                 BIC     R3, R1, #0x3F
RAM:02033834                 MOV     R1, R6
RAM:02033838                 STR     R3, [R2]
RAM:0203383C                 BL      dbg_print20228DC
```

Here’s something useful! That `"--- filetbl_load start <%d> ---\n"`{lang='c'} string you see is text that’s hardcoded in the executable program (arm9.bin) itself. 

`=aFiletblLoadSta` is an IDA-named variable that represents an offset in the ROM that stores that hardcoded string. This string’s offset is getting loaded into R0 in the `LDR R0, =aFiletblLoadSta`{lang='arm'} instruction. In ARM assembly, R0 is used as the first parameter when calling another subroutine, so the `BL` (branch-link or “call this subroutine) below uses it as a parameter. Because the string looks a lot like a debug string, we can guess that that function is a debug print function (something that would print text to the console for debugging purposes).

But more importantly, the fact that this debug string is being printed here tells us what _this function’s name was_ in the original source code: `filetbl_load()`{lang='c'}. From this, we can surmise that this function is designed to load the “file table” from the archive – i.e., it loads the header we were just looking at and that header is the list of files we thought it was! This trick (looking at debug or error strings to figure out what a function does) is something I frequently make use of – without even examining the disassembly in detail, we now have a pretty good idea of what this function does.

### Loading the Magic Integer
After trying to analyze this routine the way we did the decompression routine, it turns out that this routine is a little bit more abstract. It references a bunch of memory addresses and other things that I don’t have any context for – so let’s get some context and watch what it’s doing in the debugger. After all, our goal here isn’t to necessarily reverse-engineer exactly what this routine is doing (unlike with the decompression routine), it’s to use this routine to understand the structure of the archive file.

So back to no$GBA then. Stepping forward, we come to this `STR` instruction. `STR R2,[R0, R5]` should store the value of R2 (0x24C, what we’re suspecting is the number of files) in the memory location R0+R5. 


After we step over that instruction, we can in fact see that 0x24C got stored in 0x20C1A08 as we would expect. So now, let’s set a read breakpoint for that address to see where _it_ gets referenced.

We run the game…

And end up in this new subroutine. Navigating to this routine in IDA reveals that it’s very short.

```arm
RAM:02033A58 sub_2033A58
RAM:02033A58                 MOV     R1, #0x18
RAM:02033A5C                 MUL     R1, R0, R1
RAM:02033A60                 LDR     R0, =dword_20C19D8
RAM:02033A64                 LDR     R0, [R0,R1]
RAM:02033A68                 BX      LR
```

`BX LR`{lang='arm'} returns us to the subroutine that called this one, so given that we know the previous instruction is the one that loaded 0x24C into R0 (the register that is frequently used as a return value), we might be able to posit that the entire purpose of this subroutine is to load that value from memory. So, let’s rename this function to `arc_getNumFiles` and then step forward and see what called it.

Let’s pop open this section of this subroutine in IDA:


```arm
RAM:02033CCC loc_2033CCC
RAM:02033CCC                 MOV     R0, #1
RAM:02033CD0                 MOV     R1, R0
RAM:02033CD4                 BL      sub_2025B08
RAM:02033CD8                 CMP     R9, #0
RAM:02033CDC                 BLE     loc_2033CF0
RAM:02033CE0                 MOV     R0, R10
RAM:02033CE4                 BL      arc_getNumFiles
RAM:02033CE8                 CMP     R9, R0
RAM:02033CEC                 BLE     loc_02033D04
RAM:02033CF0
RAM:02033CF0 loc_2033CF0
RAM:02033CF0                 LDR     R1, =sArchiveFileNames
RAM:02033CF4                 LDR     R0, =aFileIndexError ; "file index error : [%s],idx=%d\n"
RAM:02033CF8                 LDR     R1, [R1,R10,LSL#2]
RAM:02033CFC                 MOV     R2, R9
RAM:02033D00                 BL      dbg_printError
```

So remember that coming out of `arc_getNumFiles`, R0 was set to (what we’re guessing is) the number of files. We can see that it gets compared to R9 immediately afterwards, and if it’s less than or equal to R9 we branch just past the end of the section I’ve shown. So let’s zero in on R9 – looking earlier up, we can see that R9 is also compared to 0, and if it’s less than or equal to zero we’re branching to loc_2033CF0. That’s the same location that we go to if R9 is greater than R0. If we examine that section, we can see another debug message – `"file index error : [%s],idx=%d\n"`{lang='c'}! For those of you not familiar with C, this is a _format string_ – the `%s` and `%d` indicate parameters to be inserted into the string. `%s` expects a **s**tring and `%d` expects a **d**ecimal number. We determined that the function that the `BL` is branching to is a “print debug error message” function by the fact that the string indicates an error is occurring, but this string gives us even more clues.

When calling a function in a higher-level language, you specify parameters that get passed to the function. In ARM assembly, these parameters are passed by setting specific registers to specific values – the first parameter is set to R0, the second parameter is set to R1, etc. So, we know that this `dbg_printError` subroutine is going to print that format string. The string itself is loaded into R0, meaning that the first parameter is the string itself. The next parameter (corresponding to `%s`) should be loaded into R1, and the final parameter (corresponding to `%d`) should be loaded into R2. 

I’ve already gone ahead and marked the value getting loaded into R1 as `=sArchiveFileNames` – if we pop over to that address in IDA, we can see why:

It’s a list of our four archive names! So that line that says `LDR R1,[R1, R10, LSL#2]` is going to load the name of the archive in. If we look at R10 in the earlier screenshot, we can see that it’s set to 2. Arrays in computer science usually start from index 0, so that means that index 2 here is going to be `aEvtBin` – `EVT.BIN` is the value of `%s`!

The next line is `MOV R2,R9` which is moving the value of R9 (our previous register of interest) into R2. From the text of the error message, we can conclude that R9 stores the file index, i.e. the position of the file we’re loading in the archive! We also know that the value we thought was the number of files in the archive was indeed that. Furthermore, based on the conditions that lead to the error message, we can also conclude that file indices start at 1 and end at the length of the archive (rather than starting at 0 and ending at `length - 1` as is more common in computing).

### Parsing the Magic Integer
Let’s continue:

```arm
RAM:02033D04 loc_2033D04
RAM:02033D04                 ADD     R2, SP, #8
RAM:02033D08                 ADD     R3, SP, #4
RAM:02033D0C                 MOV     R0, R10
RAM:02033D10                 MOV     R1, R9
RAM:02033D14                 BL      sub_2033A70
```

We’re calling `sub_2033A70` with the following parameters:

1. The archive number (2 = `evt.bin`)
2. The archive file index
3. An address
4. Another address

Let’s dive into `sub_2033A70`.

```arm
RAM:02033A70                 PUSH    {R4,LR}
RAM:02033A74                 MOV     R12, #0x18
RAM:02033A78                 MUL     R4, R0, R12
RAM:02033A7C                 LDR     R0, =dword_20C19D4
RAM:02033A80                 LDR     R12, =dword_20C19D0
RAM:02033A84                 LDR     LR, [R0,R4]
RAM:02033A88                 LDR     R0, [R12,R4]
RAM:02033A8C                 LDR     LR, [LR,R1,LSL#2]
RAM:02033A90                 LDR     R1, [R0,#0xC]
RAM:02033A94                 LDR     R0, [R0,#4]
RAM:02033A98                 MOV     R1, LR,LSR R1
RAM:02033A9C                 MUL     R0, R1, R0
RAM:02033AA0                 STR     R0, [R2]
RAM:02033AA4                 LDR     R0, [R12,R4]
RAM:02033AA8                 LDR     R1, [R0,#0x10]
RAM:02033AAC                 LDR     R0, [R0,#8]
RAM:02033AB0                 AND     R1, LR, R1
RAM:02033AB4                 MUL     R0, R1, R0
RAM:02033AB8                 STR     R0, [R3]
RAM:02033ABC                 POP     {R4,PC}
```

This subroutine isn’t too long, so we should be able to grok it; however, there are a lot of bits where it loads from some memory addresses and I don’t know what’s stored in those addresses. So let’s head back to the debugger.

After executing a few steps, we can see that the first bit of this subroutine is just loading the address of the `evt.bin` header we’ve already found into R0. It’s also setting `LR` (which is R14) to the address of the first item in the cyan-highlighted pattern we noticed earlier. Interesting! The currently highlighted step is `LDR LR, [LR,R1,LSL#2]`{lang='arm'} – this instruction is going to load the value at the address `LR + R1 * 4` into LR. R1, remember, is the file index – therefore, this is loading the cyan-highlighted value that corresponds to that file index! The address we should be loading from is `0x020F771C + 0x245 * 4 = 0x20F8030`, and indeed, when we step forward we see that value loaded in.

I have dubbed these values in the file table “magic integers” – I’ll explain why in a bit, but that’s the nomenclature I’m going to be using from here on out. Now that the magic integer is loaded in, let’s see what happens next.

The next two instructions load the integers at offsets 0x0C and 0x04 in `evt.bin` into R1 and R0, respectively. These instructions are then used in some calculations:

* `MOV R1, LR,LSR R1`{lang='arm'} – This instruction shifts the magic integer right by the value of R1 (0x11 or 17) and stores the result in R1. Since magic integers are 32-bit integers, this gives us the 15 most-significant bits of the magic integer.
* `MUL R0, R1, R0`{lang='arm'} – This instruction multiplies R1 by R0 (0x800) and stores the result in R0.

After executing these two instructions…



The value of R0 is now 0x2D5000. Wait a second – we just multiplied the top part of the magic integer (the one we saw consistently increasing!) by 0x800 (which every offset is divisible by). Could this be the offset of a file we just calculated?

It is indeed! We just found the routine for calculating the offset of a file given its index!

The next instruction stores our freshly-calculated offset in memory. The instruction after that loads the starting address of the `evt.bin` header again. After that, we have two instructions that are similar to what we saw before.

This time, we’re loading the values at offsets 0x10 and 0x08 into R1 and R0, respectively. Once again, we’re going to use these values to do some math on the magic integer.

* `AND R1, LR, R1`{lang='arm'} – this instruction is performing a bitwise-and between the contents of R1 (0x1FFFF) and the magic integer. This effectively gets the 17 least-significant bits of the magic integer (the complement to the 15 most-significant bits we calculated above).
* `MUL R0, R1, R0`{lang=’arm’} – this instruction multiplies R1 by R0 (0x08) and stores the result in R0.

The end-result of this calculation is 0x5398.

And that’s the end of the function. So we’ve found the offset, but what’s that 0x5398 number? Let’s head back to the caller function in IDA and see if we can figure it out.


```arm
RAM:02033D04                 ADD     R2, SP, #0x30+var_28
RAM:02033D08                 ADD     R3, SP, #0x30+var_2C
RAM:02033D0C                 MOV     R0, R10
RAM:02033D10                 MOV     R1, R9
RAM:02033D14                 BL      arc_processMagicInteger
RAM:02033D18                 MOV     R0, #0x18
RAM:02033D1C                 MUL     R1, R10, R0
RAM:02033D20                 LDR     R0, =dword_20C19D0
RAM:02033D24                 LDR     R6, [SP,#0x30+var_2C]
RAM:02033D28                 LDR     R0, [R0,R1]
RAM:02033D2C                 LDR     R5, [R0,#4]
RAM:02033D30                 ADD     R0, R6, R5
RAM:02033D34                 MOV     R1, R5
RAM:02033D38                 SUB     R0, R0, #1
RAM:02033D3C                 BL      sub_201D310
RAM:02033D40                 MUL     R4, R5, R0
RAM:02033D44                 ADD     R0, R6, #0xFF
RAM:02033D48                 ADD     R1, R0, #0x300
RAM:02033D4C                 MOV     R0, R1,ASR#9
RAM:02033D50                 ADD     R0, R1, R0,LSR#22
RAM:02033D54                 MOV     R0, R0,ASR#10
RAM:02033D58                 STR     R0, [SP,#0x30+var_30]
RAM:02033D5C                 LDR     R1, =sArchiveFileNames
RAM:02033D60                 LDR     R0, =aReadSIdxDOfs0x ; "read:[%s],idx=%d,ofs=0x%x,sz=%dKB"
RAM:02033D64                 LDR     R1, [R1,R10,LSL#2]
RAM:02033D68                 LDR     R3, [SP,#0x30+var_28]
RAM:02033D6C                 MOV     R2, R9
RAM:02033D70                 BL      dbg_print20228DC
```

Note that debug string there (`"read:[%s],idx=%d,ofs=0x%x,sz=%dKB"`{lang='c'})? After the magic integer is processed, we have a debug string explicitly referencing the file index, offset, and _size_. So let’s have a look at the one subroutine call in between `arc_processMagicInteger` and that debug string: `sub_201D310`.

### The Unhinged File Length Routine
Beware, this one’s a long one. Don’t worry about understanding all of it, it’s not really important for the purposes of this article. It’s an extremely obfuscated way of determining file length.

```arm
RAM:0201D310                 CMP     R1, #0
RAM:0201D314                 BXEQ    LR
RAM:0201D318                 CMP     R0, R1
RAM:0201D31C                 MOVCC   R1, R0
RAM:0201D320                 MOVCC   R0, #0
RAM:0201D324                 BXCC    LR
RAM:0201D328                 MOV     R2, #0x1C
RAM:0201D32C                 MOV     R3, R0,LSR#4
RAM:0201D330                 CMP     R1, R3,LSR#12
RAM:0201D334                 SUBLE   R2, R2, #0x10
RAM:0201D338                 MOVLE   R3, R3,LSR#16
RAM:0201D33C                 CMP     R1, R3,LSR#4
RAM:0201D340                 SUBLE   R2, R2, #8
RAM:0201D344                 MOVLE   R3, R3,LSR#8
RAM:0201D348                 CMP     R1, R3
RAM:0201D34C                 SUBLE   R2, R2, #4
RAM:0201D350                 MOVLE   R3, R3,LSR#4
RAM:0201D354                 MOV     R0, R0,LSL R2
RAM:0201D358                 RSB     R1, R1, #0
RAM:0201D35C                 ADDS    R0, R0, R0
RAM:0201D360                 ADD     R2, R2, R2,LSL#1
RAM:0201D364                 ADD     PC, PC, R2,LSL#2
RAM:0201D368 ; ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
RAM:0201D368                 NOP
RAM:0201D36C
RAM:0201D36C loc_201D36C
RAM:0201D36C                 ADCS    R3, R1, R3,LSL#1
RAM:0201D370                 SUBCC   R3, R3, R1
RAM:0201D374                 ADCS    R0, R0, R0
RAM:0201D378                 ADCS    R3, R1, R3,LSL#1
RAM:0201D37C                 SUBCC   R3, R3, R1
RAM:0201D380                 ADCS    R0, R0, R0
RAM:0201D384                 ADCS    R3, R1, R3,LSL#1
RAM:0201D388                 SUBCC   R3, R3, R1
RAM:0201D38C                 ADCS    R0, R0, R0
RAM:0201D390                 ADCS    R3, R1, R3,LSL#1
RAM:0201D394                 SUBCC   R3, R3, R1
RAM:0201D398                 ADCS    R0, R0, R0
RAM:0201D39C                 ADCS    R3, R1, R3,LSL#1
RAM:0201D3A0                 SUBCC   R3, R3, R1
RAM:0201D3A4                 ADCS    R0, R0, R0
RAM:0201D3A8                 ADCS    R3, R1, R3,LSL#1
RAM:0201D3AC                 SUBCC   R3, R3, R1
RAM:0201D3B0                 ADCS    R0, R0, R0
RAM:0201D3B4                 ADCS    R3, R1, R3,LSL#1
RAM:0201D3B8                 SUBCC   R3, R3, R1
RAM:0201D3BC                 ADCS    R0, R0, R0
RAM:0201D3C0                 ADCS    R3, R1, R3,LSL#1
RAM:0201D3C4                 SUBCC   R3, R3, R1
RAM:0201D3C8                 ADCS    R0, R0, R0
RAM:0201D3CC                 ADCS    R3, R1, R3,LSL#1
RAM:0201D3D0                 SUBCC   R3, R3, R1
RAM:0201D3D4                 ADCS    R0, R0, R0
RAM:0201D3D8                 ADCS    R3, R1, R3,LSL#1
RAM:0201D3DC                 SUBCC   R3, R3, R1
RAM:0201D3E0                 ADCS    R0, R0, R0
RAM:0201D3E4                 ADCS    R3, R1, R3,LSL#1
RAM:0201D3E8                 SUBCC   R3, R3, R1
RAM:0201D3EC                 ADCS    R0, R0, R0
RAM:0201D3F0                 ADCS    R3, R1, R3,LSL#1
RAM:0201D3F4                 SUBCC   R3, R3, R1
RAM:0201D3F8                 ADCS    R0, R0, R0
RAM:0201D3FC                 ADCS    R3, R1, R3,LSL#1
RAM:0201D400                 SUBCC   R3, R3, R1
RAM:0201D404                 ADCS    R0, R0, R0
RAM:0201D408                 ADCS    R3, R1, R3,LSL#1
RAM:0201D40C                 SUBCC   R3, R3, R1
RAM:0201D410                 ADCS    R0, R0, R0
RAM:0201D414                 ADCS    R3, R1, R3,LSL#1
RAM:0201D418                 SUBCC   R3, R3, R1
RAM:0201D41C                 ADCS    R0, R0, R0
RAM:0201D420                 ADCS    R3, R1, R3,LSL#1
RAM:0201D424                 SUBCC   R3, R3, R1
RAM:0201D428                 ADCS    R0, R0, R0
RAM:0201D42C                 ADCS    R3, R1, R3,LSL#1
RAM:0201D430                 SUBCC   R3, R3, R1
RAM:0201D434                 ADCS    R0, R0, R0
RAM:0201D438                 ADCS    R3, R1, R3,LSL#1
RAM:0201D43C                 SUBCC   R3, R3, R1
RAM:0201D440                 ADCS    R0, R0, R0
RAM:0201D444                 ADCS    R3, R1, R3,LSL#1
RAM:0201D448                 SUBCC   R3, R3, R1
RAM:0201D44C                 ADCS    R0, R0, R0
RAM:0201D450                 ADCS    R3, R1, R3,LSL#1
RAM:0201D454                 SUBCC   R3, R3, R1
RAM:0201D458                 ADCS    R0, R0, R0
RAM:0201D45C                 ADCS    R3, R1, R3,LSL#1
RAM:0201D460                 SUBCC   R3, R3, R1
RAM:0201D464                 ADCS    R0, R0, R0
RAM:0201D468                 ADCS    R3, R1, R3,LSL#1
RAM:0201D46C                 SUBCC   R3, R3, R1
RAM:0201D470                 ADCS    R0, R0, R0
RAM:0201D474                 ADCS    R3, R1, R3,LSL#1
RAM:0201D478                 SUBCC   R3, R3, R1
RAM:0201D47C                 ADCS    R0, R0, R0
RAM:0201D480                 ADCS    R3, R1, R3,LSL#1
RAM:0201D484                 SUBCC   R3, R3, R1
RAM:0201D488                 ADCS    R0, R0, R0
RAM:0201D48C                 ADCS    R3, R1, R3,LSL#1
RAM:0201D490                 SUBCC   R3, R3, R1
RAM:0201D494                 ADCS    R0, R0, R0
RAM:0201D498                 ADCS    R3, R1, R3,LSL#1
RAM:0201D49C                 SUBCC   R3, R3, R1
RAM:0201D4A0                 ADCS    R0, R0, R0
RAM:0201D4A4                 ADCS    R3, R1, R3,LSL#1
RAM:0201D4A8                 SUBCC   R3, R3, R1
RAM:0201D4AC                 ADCS    R0, R0, R0
RAM:0201D4B0                 ADCS    R3, R1, R3,LSL#1
RAM:0201D4B4                 SUBCC   R3, R3, R1
RAM:0201D4B8                 ADCS    R0, R0, R0
RAM:0201D4BC                 ADCS    R3, R1, R3,LSL#1
RAM:0201D4C0                 SUBCC   R3, R3, R1
RAM:0201D4C4                 ADCS    R0, R0, R0
RAM:0201D4C8                 ADCS    R3, R1, R3,LSL#1
RAM:0201D4CC                 SUBCC   R3, R3, R1
RAM:0201D4D0                 ADCS    R0, R0, R0
RAM:0201D4D4                 ADCS    R3, R1, R3,LSL#1
RAM:0201D4D8                 SUBCC   R3, R3, R1
RAM:0201D4DC                 ADCS    R0, R0, R0
RAM:0201D4E0                 ADCS    R3, R1, R3,LSL#1
RAM:0201D4E4                 SUBCC   R3, R3, R1
RAM:0201D4E8                 ADCS    R0, R0, R0
RAM:0201D4EC                 MOV     R1, R3
RAM:0201D4F0                 BX      LR
```

Here it is in all its glory: what I have dubbed the “unhinged file length routine.” That 0x5398 number was indeed not the actual compressed length, but rather an encoded compressed length that was decoded by this routine. A quick FAQ:

* Q: Why is there so much repetition in this routine?<br/>
  A: This is a function of some compilers (including ARM compilers) called _loop unrolling_. Basically, there is a tradeoff made in favor of execution time over program space when the compiler can statically determine how many loops will occur at compile time.
* Q: What does that mean?<br/>
  A: Don’t worry, it doesn’t really matter. Point is, that’s a loop, so we can treat it as a loop.
* Q: I’m seeing a lot of `ADCS` and `SUBCC` instructions here. What’s up with those?<br/>
  A: `ADCS` is “add with carry, set flags.” Essentially, this means that we add two numbers and, if the previous operation resulted in a “carry,” we add one to the sum. A “carry” here refers to “unsigned overflow” – when a 32-bit integer exceeds its maximum value and loops back around. `SUBCC` is “sub if carry clear.” This means we subtract two numbers if the previous operation did _not_ result in a carry.
* Q: Why would the devs do it this way?<br/>
  A: They want to fuck with me specifically.

## Out of the Woods
Whew! That was a lot of assembly. We could keep going down through subroutines, but we’ve accomplished our main task now: we understand a lot about how Shade bin archives work. If we return to our original list of what we expected an archive might have:

* We found the number of files (it’s the first four bytes of the archive).
* While there don’t seem to be obviously-located filenames, we did find the mapping between a file’s _index_ (which appears to be how it’s looked up), its offset, and its compressed length
* The file data is definitely present and padded to be 0x800-byte aligned.

Nice! That’s great progress. Let’s see if we can write something to parse the archive now.

### Writing Our Own Parser
Let’s start by thinking about how we want to represent our archive file in C#. There are four different archives, each with their own file type – to me, this screams like a time for a generic class. Let’s start by making a generic class to represent files in the archives.

```csharp
public partial class FileInArchive
{
    public uint MagicInteger { get; set; }
    public int Index { get; set; }
    public int Offset { get; set; }
    public List<byte> Data { get; set; }
    public byte[] CompressedData { get; set; }
    public bool Edited { get; set; } = false;

    public FileInArchive()
    {
    }
}
```

Pretty basic stuff – we have properties for the magic integer, the index, the offset, and the compressed/uncompressed data. We also have an `Edited` property to indicate if we’ve modified the file or not. Finally, we have a blank constructor for now – we’ll let derived classes implement that.

Now to make the generic archive file:

```csharp
public class ArchiveFile<T>
    where T : FileInArchive, new()
{
    public const int FirstHeaderPointerOffset = 0x20;

    public string FileName { get; set; }
    public int NumFiles { get; set; }
    public int HeaderLength { get; set; }
    public int MagicIntegerMsbMultiplier { get; set; }
    public int MagicIntegerLsbMultiplier { get; set; }
    public int MagicIntegerLsbAnd { get; set; }
    public int MagicIntegerMsbShift { get; set; }
    public List<uint> MagicIntegers { get; set; } = new();
    public List<T> Files { get; set; } = new();
}
```

All of this is stuff we’ve seen before. Now, to the constructor:

```csharp
public ArchiveFile(byte[] archiveBytes)
{
    NumFiles = BitConverter.ToInt32(archiveBytes.Take(4).ToArray());

    MagicIntegerMsbMultiplier = BitConverter.ToInt32(archiveBytes.Skip(0x04).Take(4).ToArray());
    MagicIntegerLsbMultiplier = BitConverter.ToInt32(archiveBytes.Skip(0x08).Take(4).ToArray());

    MagicIntegerLsbAnd = BitConverter.ToInt32(archiveBytes.Skip(0x10).Take(4).ToArray());
    MagicIntegerMsbShift = BitConverter.ToInt32(archiveBytes.Skip(0x0C).Take(4).ToArray());

    for (int i = FirstMagicIntegerOffset; i < (NumFiles * 4) + 0x20; i += 4)
    {
        MagicIntegers.Add(BitConverter.ToUInt32(archiveBytes.Skip(i).Take(4).ToArray()));
    }
```

Here, we’re just extracting the values we found from the header and then looping through and extracting all the magic integers.

Before we get to adding files to the archive, we have to convert that compressed length function. I could go through and explain how I converted from the assembly step-by-step, but that would be a lengthy and tedious explanation. So instead, here’s the final code:

```csharp
public int GetFileLength(uint magicInteger)
{
    // absolutely unhinged routine
    int magicLengthInt = 0x7FF + (int)((magicInteger & (uint)MagicIntegerLsbAnd) * (uint)MagicIntegerLsbMultiplier);
    int standardLengthIncrement = 0x800;
    if (magicLengthInt < standardLengthIncrement)
    {
        magicLengthInt = 0;
    }
    else
    {
        int magicLengthIntLeftShift = 0x1C;
        uint salt = (uint)magicLengthInt >> 0x04;
        if (standardLengthIncrement <= salt >> 0x0C)
        {
            magicLengthIntLeftShift -= 0x10;
            salt >>= 0x10;
        }
        if (standardLengthIncrement <= salt >> 0x04)
        {
            magicLengthIntLeftShift -= 0x08;
            salt >>= 0x08;
        }
        if (standardLengthIncrement <= salt)
        {
            magicLengthIntLeftShift -= 0x04;
            salt >>= 0x04;
        }

        magicLengthInt = (int)((uint)magicLengthInt << magicLengthIntLeftShift);
        standardLengthIncrement = 0 - standardLengthIncrement;

        bool carryFlag = Helpers.AddWillCauseCarry(magicLengthInt, magicLengthInt);
        magicLengthInt *= 2;

        int pcIncrement = magicLengthIntLeftShift * 12;

        for (; pcIncrement <= 0x174; pcIncrement += 0x0C)
        {
            // ADCS
            bool nextCarryFlag = Helpers.AddWillCauseCarry(standardLengthIncrement, (int)(salt << 1) + (carryFlag ? 1 : 0));
            salt = (uint)standardLengthIncrement + (salt << 1) + (uint)(carryFlag ? 1 : 0);
            carryFlag = nextCarryFlag;
            // SUBCC
            if (!carryFlag)
            {
                salt -= (uint)standardLengthIncrement;
            }
            // ADCS
            nextCarryFlag = Helpers.AddWillCauseCarry(magicLengthInt, magicLengthInt + (carryFlag ? 1 : 0));
            magicLengthInt = (magicLengthInt * 2) + (carryFlag ? 1 : 0);
            carryFlag = nextCarryFlag;
        }
    }

    return magicLengthInt * 0x800;
}
```

Now we have a function that can determine the compressed length of a file from its magic integer. But here’s the problem – when we save the file, we’ll have to reverse that and go from the compressed length back to the magic integer. How do we accomplish that?

Well, at some point, someone had a program that could do that, but I am not that person. What’s more, this function is way over my head and I have no idea how to even begin trying to reverse it. But it’s not the end of the line for us – remember that this value is calculated with a bitwise-and against 0x1FFFF. That means that the possible values of the encoded integer (i.e. the input to the unhinged file length routine) range from 0 to 0x1FFFF. That’s only 131,072 possible values which in the scope of things isn’t that many. So we just… calculate all the possible encoded values based on file length and add them to a dictionary.

```csharp
for (int i = 0; i <= MagicIntegerLsbAnd; i++)
{
    int length = GetFileLength((uint)i);
    if (!LengthToMagicIntegerMap.ContainsKey(length))
    {
        LengthToMagicIntegerMap.Add(length, i);
    }
}
```

Then when we want a new magic integer, we just do:

```csharp
public uint GetNewMagicInteger(T file, int compressedLength)
{
    uint offsetComponent = (uint)(file.Offset / MagicIntegerMsbMultiplier) << MagicIntegerMsbShift;
    int newLength = (compressedLength + 0x7FF) & ~0x7FF; // round to nearest 0x800
    int newLengthComponent = LengthToMagicIntegerMap[newLength];

    return offsetComponent | (uint)newLengthComponent;
}
```

Finally, we’re ready to start parsing the files. All we have to do is loop through the magic integers, get the file offset and compressed length from each, and then use those to take the file data and initialize a `FileInArchive` derivative.

```csharp
for (int i = 0; i < MagicIntegers.Count; i++)
{
    int offset = GetFileOffset(MagicIntegers[i]);
    int compressedLength = GetFileLength(MagicIntegers[i]);
    byte[] fileBytes = archiveBytes.Skip(offset).Take(compressedLength).ToArray();
    if (fileBytes.Length > 0)
    {
        T file = new();
        try
        {
            file = FileManager<T>.FromCompressedData(fileBytes, offset); // Don’t worry about this function, all it’s doing is initializing the file.
        }
        catch (IndexOutOfRangeException)
        {
            Console.WriteLine($"Failed to parse file at 0x{i:X8} due to index out of range exception (most likely during decompression)");
        }
        file.Offset = offset;
        file.MagicInteger = MagicIntegers[i];
        file.Index = i + 1;
        file.Length = compressedLength;
        file.CompressedData = fileBytes.ToArray();
        Files.Add(file);
    }
}
```

So we have a functional parser now. We can write up a quick GUI to show us how file loading will look and…



Very nice looking! (I was working on parsing the event/script files at the same time as I was working on parsing the archives, but we won’t be covering event file reverse-engineering in this post.) So now we can open `evt.bin` and even edit the files inside it. There’s still one step left, though – we have to be able to save the bin archives once we’re done editing them.

### Saving the Archive
The ideal way to save the archive is to reconstruct it from scratch, but because there’s data in the header we don’t understand fully we’ll have to settle for editing the header in place. So, we’ll start by just adding the whole header we took while parsing.

```csharp
public byte[] GetBytes()
{
    List<byte> bytes = new();

    bytes.AddRange(Header);
```

Next, we’re going to loop through all the files and add them to the archive in order. If the file hasn’t been edited, then we’ll just add it directly to the archive. If the file has been edited, though, we’ll have to compress the edited data.

```csharp
    for (int i = 0; i < Files.Count; i++)
    {
        byte[] compressedBytes;
        if (!Files[i].Edited || Files[i].Data is null || Files[i].Data.Count == 0)
        {
            compressedBytes = Files[i].CompressedData;
        }
        else
        {
            compressedBytes = Helpers.CompressData(Files[i].GetBytes());
        }
        bytes.AddRange(compressedBytes);
```

Here, we hit a snag – in some cases, the edited file is going to be longer than the original file, right? This will happen more often than we think since my implementation of the compression algorithm is noticeably less efficient than the implementation the developers used, so even files that stay the same size decompressed will end up longer on recompression. The solution to this problem is actually pretty simple, just a bit tedious: we move everything further down.

Why is moving things down tedious? Well it comes back to the magic integers – those contain _offsets_ for each file. By moving the file down, we’re changing its offset, which means the magic integer will change as well. So we need to write code to do that. 

```csharp
        if (i < Files.Count - 1) // If we aren’t on the last file
        {
            int pointerShift = 0; // Assume we’re not going to be shifting offsets at all
            while (bytes.Count % 0x10 != 0) // ensure our file is 16-byte aligned
            {
                bytes.Add(0);
            }
            // If the current size of the archive we’ve constructed so far is greater than
            // the next file’s offset, that means we need to adjust the next file’s offset
            if (bytes.Count > Files[i + 1].Offset)
            {
                // Calculate how much we need to shift the magic integer by
                pointerShift = ((bytes.Count - Files[i + 1].Offset) / MagicIntegerMsbMultiplier) + 1;
            }
            if (pointerShift > 0)
            {
                // Calculate the new magic integer factoring in pointer shift
                Files[i + 1].Offset = ((Files[i + 1].Offset / MagicIntegerMsbMultiplier) + pointerShift) * MagicIntegerMsbMultiplier;
                int magicIntegerOffset = FirstMagicIntegerOffset + (i + 1) * 4;
                uint newMagicInteger = GetNewMagicInteger(Files[i + 1], Files[i + 1].Length);
                Files[i + 1].MagicInteger = newMagicInteger;
                MagicIntegers[i + 1] = newMagicInteger;
                bytes.RemoveRange(magicIntegerOffset, 4);
                bytes.InsertRange(magicIntegerOffset, BitConverter.GetBytes(Files[i + 1].MagicInteger));
            }
            // Add file padding
            while (bytes.Count < Files[i + 1].Offset)
            {
                bytes.Add(0);
            }
        }
```

Bam. We have working code that will shift the magic integers. So let’s test it – let’s modify a file and save the archive and see if we can change some text.



I present to you the first text I ever edited into the game. 🥰

## What’s Next
We’ve now parsed and repacked the archive successfully. The next thing we’ll talk about is the first files I reverse-engineered: the event files, which contained the script for the game. But before that, I’ll be posting an addendum to these two posts which will contain answers to commonly-asked questions and a few historical notes on the actual process we underwent to get this all working. Thanks for reading and please look forward to it!
