---
title: 'Installation'
navigation:
  faicon: 'fa6-solid:box-open'
  previous: '/chokuretsu/serial-loops/docs/introduction'
  next: '/chokuretsu/serial-loops/docs/introduction/getting-started'
---

Serial Loops is available for Windows, macOS, and Linux. You can get the latest release from [here](https://github.com/haroohie-club/SerialLoops/releases/latest).

* For Windows, we currently only distribute a "portable" style app in a zip file. This means there is no installer;
  instead, you simply extract Serial Loops to a folder and begin editing. In the future, we plan to offer a standard
  installer experience.
* For macOS, we provide DMGs for both Intel (x64) and Apple Silicon (ARM) devices. To use these, you simply open the DMG
  and drag the application to the Applications folder. However, because we don't codesign Serial Loops, there is one
  additional step: you'll need to open your terminal and run the following command:
  ```
  xattr -cr /Applications/SerialLoops.Mac.app
  ```
  This command makes macOS allow the application to be run.
* On Debian-based Linux distros, the application can be installed using the Debian package we distribute. Simply run
  `sudo dpkg -i SerialLoops-verison_amd64.deb` to install it. You can then install OpenAL by running `sudo apt install libopenal-dev`.
* For other Linux distros, we distribute portable binaries in a tar.gz file. After extracting the files to a location
  of your preference, make sure you install OpenAL through the appropriate process for your distro.

Before you run Serial Loops, you'll need to also install devkitARM. The devkitPro organization (which distributes devkitARM) has detailed
installation instructions [on their website](https://devkitpro.org/wiki/Getting_Started).

After you've installed Serial Loops and devkitARM, you're ready to get started!